ECSE 415: Introduction to Computer Vision
Course Project: Classification, Detection, and Localization
Winter 2026
Due Date: April 9, 2026, 11:59 PM
1 Introduction
The goal of this project is to implement and compare different Computer Vision approaches and
methods for object classification, and then use your best model to detect and localize objects in
complex scenes. You will implementthree distinct classification techniquesto distinguish dogs
from cats. Then, you will select your highest-performing classifier and use it to build a detection
and localization pipeline that finds bounding boxes for dogs in a separate dataset.
Figure 1: Miniature Schnauzer (ID: 60, Stanford Dog Dataset)
2 General Guidelines and Rules
Please adhere to the following rules regarding the project structure and grading:
•Team Work:You will form a team of 4-5 people for this project.
•Tools:Software packages (e.g., scikit-learn, MATLAB, Keras, PyTorch) that implement
machine learning algorithms are allowed.
•Academic Integrity:All submitted materials are expected to be the students’ own work.
The use of external code without appropriate citation will be treated as plagiarism.
1•Late Policy:Projects received up to 24 hours late will be penalized by 30%. Projects
received more than 24 hours late will not be graded.
•Total Grade:The project will be graded out of a total of 100 points.
3 Part 1: The Classification Benchmark [50 Points]
Kaggle Competition Link:https://www.kaggle.com/t/95bd3900e6ea43cbbb48e5699b8b3820
You will use theDogs vs. Cats Datasetprovided in the competition link above. Download the
data directly from the competition page.
The dataset is divided into two parts:
1.Labeled Data (train.zip):Contains images with known labels.
2.Kaggle Public Test Set (test.zip):Contains unlabeled images used strictly for the com-
petition leaderboard (see Section 3.3).
To generate the required analysis and confusion matrices for your report (Section 3.2), you cannot
use the Kaggle Public Test Set because it has no labels. Therefore, you must split the provided
Labeled Datainto aTraining Splitand anInternal Test Split(e.g., 80/20). You will train
your models on the Training Split and evaluate their performance metrics on your Internal Test
Split. You will then take your best performing model and use it to compete in the online Kaggle
competition using the unlabeled set.
3.1 Method Selection (Training) [20 Points]
You must implement a total ofthreedifferent classification techniques based on the options below.
You must chooseone from Option A,one from Option B, andyour third technique can
be from A, B, or C. Groups are free to be creative in choosing their specific algorithms.
•Option A: Feature-Based Approaches
Extract your favorite handcrafted features (e.g., Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG),
SIFT, or Local Binary Patterns) and train a classical classifier (e.g., Support Vector Machine
(SVM), Random Forest, or KNN).
•Option B: Appearance-Based / Dimensionality Reduction
Use techniques that rely on the global appearance of the image or dimensionality reduction.
For example, you may apply Principal Component Analysis (PCA) directly on the image
pixels (e.g., “EigenDogs”), or apply PCA to a set of features before passing them to a classifier.
•Option C: Deep Learning (Modern)
Use a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). You may build a custom architecture or fine-
tune a pre-trained model (e.g., ResNet, VGG) on the Kaggle dataset. You may not use a
2pre-trained model as a “zero-shot” classifier without fine-tuning or training it on the provided
data.
3.2 Local Analysis and Evaluation [20 Points]
Once your models are trained, perform the following analysis using yourInternal Test Split:
1.Quantitative Evaluation [10 Points]:Compute and display theConfusion Matrixfor
all three techniques.
2.Method Comparison [10 Points]:Discuss the trade-offs between your different classifier
models (e.g., Feature-Based vs. Appearance-Based vs. Deep Learning). For example, where
did one fail and the other succeed? Which was more computationally expensive?
3.3 Kaggle Competition Submission [10 Points]
Now that you have analyzed your models locally, select your single best-performing model and
compare its performance against those of your classmates.
1.Generate Predictions:Run your best model on the unlabeledKaggle Public Test Set
provided. This ensures a unified test set is used for class ranking.
2.Submit to Leaderboard:Submit your CSV file to the Kaggle Leaderboard.
We will be checking that all teams have submitted results to the leaderboard and the winning team
will get a prize.
4 Part 2: Detection and Localization [50 Points]
Download:https://mcgill-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/benjamin_beggs_mcgill_
ca/IgCI5Z5WAg3lSJC13KKnyQncAWATdWR2qGs7ZW8ste28FlY?e=nzlWUn
Now that you have a working classifier, you can use it to find dogs in complex scenes. You will
choose thebest performing classifierfrom Part 1 and use it to detect and localize dogs in the
Stanford Dogs Dataset. Download the images and annotations from the link provided above.
You arestrictly prohibitedfrom downloading or using any pre-computed feature sets or models
for the Stanford dataset.
Note: Unlike Part 1, there is no Kaggle Leaderboard submission for this section. You will only
evaluate your performance locally.
34.1 Localization Strategy [20 Points]
It is up to you to decide how to use your classifier to find the bounding box, and you are free to
explore different approaches to accomplish this. For example, you can use a patch-based sliding
window, where you slide a window across the image, run your classifier on each patch, and record
the locations with high “Dog” probabilities. However, you are also free to pursue other methods
of localization if you feel they are better suited to the design of your classifier. You may also, for
example, use techniques like Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) to merge overlapping detections
into a single, high-confidence bounding box.
4.2 Analysis and Evaluation [30 Points]
Evaluate your detection pipeline on the Stanford Dogs dataset:
1.Quantitative Evaluation [10 Points]:Compare your predicted bounding boxes against
the ground truth annotations. Calculate and report theIntersection over Union (IoU)
metrics.
(Reference: PyImageSearch IoU Tutorial)
2.Successes & Failures [10 Points]:Show visual examples where your localization pipeline
succeeded and where it failed.
3.Qualitative Discussion [10 Points]:Explainwhythe model failed in specific cases. Was
it due to lighting, occlusion, background clutter, etc?
4.(BONUS) Breeds [+5 Points]:Does the pipeline perform well with some breeds and
poorly with others? Why might that be?
5 Submission Instructions
1.Deliverables:Submit (i) a report in PDF format, and (ii) all code required to reproduce
your results in a single Jupyter notebook.
2.Report Format:The report should be comprehensive but concise. It shouldnot exceed
10 pagesexcluding references.
3.Code Requirements:
•Make sure the submitted code runs without error.
•Comment your code appropriately.
•Add aREADMEsection to your Jupyter notebook if required.
•If external libraries were used, specify them by name and version in a Markdown cell of
your Jupyter notebook.
4.Penalty:Submissions that do not follow the format (e.g., exceeding page limits or missing
files) will be penalized 10%.
4